set-up-your-mcp-server-for-splunk.md, before:


# Lab 1: Set up MCP for Splunk (🔧)

Install prerequisites, prepare your environment, and run the MCP server.

## 🚀 Quick Start (Recommended)

### 1) Clone the repository

```bash
mkdir -p ~/dev1666
cd ~/dev1666
git clone https://github.com/deslicer/mcp-for-splunk.git
cd mcp-for-splunk
# Checkout dev1666 branch in git, this branch has a prepared .env file for you.
git checkout dev1666
```

### 2) Copy the lab environment
macOS/Linux (bash):
```bash
cp env.lab .env
```
Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
Copy-Item env.lab .env -Force
```
### 3) Install prerequisites (uv, Node.js, Python via uv)
macOS/Linux (bash):
```bash
./scripts/smart-install.sh
```
Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
pwsh -File scripts\smart-install.ps1
```
### 4) Run the server locally
**Updated SPLUNK_PASSWORD will be provided by instructors**
```python
uv run mcp-server --local -d

```

### 5) Verify the mcp server and Splunk connection

```python
uv run mcp-server --test --detailed
```

<details>
<summary>View sample successful output</summary>

```bash
== MCP Server Check ==
URL: http://0.0.0.0:8003/mcp/
• MCP Server: OK ✅
• Tools: 39 | Resources: 17

-- Splunk Health --
• Status: Connected ✅
• Server: sh-i-0b8d6e25a.deslicer.splunkcloud.com
• Version: 9.3.2411.113
• Source: server_config
```
</details>

**Lab complete:** If the script returns MCP Server: OK ✅ and Splunk Health  Status: Connected ✅ you have successfully completed the set up lab.

If Splunk shows "Not connected ❌":

- Verify your `.env` file contains correct values for `SPLUNK_HOST`, `SPLUNK_PORT`, `SPLUNK_USERNAME`, `SPLUNK_PASSWORD`, `SPLUNK_SCHEME`, `SPLUNK_VERIFY_SSL`.
  ```python
  uv run mcp-server --setup --local -d

Commit message:

docs: Enhance lab guides with user experience prompts
- Added user experience prompts in the form of instructions to follow the README sections for Labs 1, 2, and 3.
- Aimed at improving clarity and guiding users through the setup processes for the MCP server, AI Sidekick, and AI Agent creation.

set-up-your-mcp-server-for-splunk.md, after:


# Lab 1: Set up MCP for Splunk (🔧)

> **📖 For a better user experience, please follow the comprehensive instructions in the [README.md Lab 1 section](./README.md#lab-1-set-up-mcp-server-for-data-analytics).**

Install prerequisites, prepare your environment, and run the MCP server.

## 🚀 Quick Start (Recommended)

### 1) Clone the repository

```bash
mkdir -p ~/dev1666
cd ~/dev1666
git clone https://github.com/deslicer/mcp-for-splunk.git
cd mcp-for-splunk
# Checkout dev1666 branch in git, this branch has a prepared .env file for you.
git checkout dev1666
```

### 2) Copy the lab environment
macOS/Linux (bash):
```bash
cp env.lab .env
```
Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
Copy-Item env.lab .env -Force
```
### 3) Install prerequisites (uv, Node.js, Python via uv)
macOS/Linux (bash):
```bash
./scripts/smart-install.sh
```
Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
pwsh -File scripts\smart-install.ps1
```
### 4) Run the server locally
**Updated SPLUNK_PASSWORD will be provided by instructors**
```python
uv run mcp-server --local -d

```

### 5) Verify the mcp server and Splunk connection

```python
uv run mcp-server --test --detailed
```

<details>
<summary>View sample successful output</summary>

```bash
== MCP Server Check ==
URL: http://0.0.0.0:8003/mcp/
• MCP Server: OK ✅
• Tools: 39 | Resources: 17

-- Splunk Health --
• Status: Connected ✅
• Server: sh-i-0b8d6e25a.deslicer.splunkcloud.com
• Version: 9.3.2411.113
• Source: server_config
```
</details>

**Lab complete:** If the script returns MCP Server: OK ✅ and Splunk Health  Status: Connected ✅ you have successfully completed the set up lab.

If Splunk shows "Not connected ❌":

- Verify your `.env` file contains correct values for `SPLUNK_HOST`, `SPLUNK_PORT`, `SPLUNK_USERNAME`, `SPLUNK_PASSWORD`, `SPLUNK_SCHEME`, `SPLUNK_VERIFY_SSL`.
  ```python
  uv run mcp-server --setup --local -d
